Annette Jensina Peterson, daughter of Henry Peterson, was born on January 5th, 1901. Almost 84 years later she is living history for my family. She is my father's mother.

Annette's parents were both originally from Denmark. Anna Markison was born January 20, 1866 and left Copenhagen with her family when she was one year old. Hans Peterson's birth was February 28, 1863 and he left Langeland Island, Denmark at 16 to come to America to seek his fortune. They had eight children and Annette is the third youngest. She was born and raised in Little Falls, Minnesota.

Annette's father worked at a lumber yard but got hurt and went into selling produce and running a greenhouse. He did this for many years. He was also very community minded and involved in community development projects. He also built the family homes. One of them burnt and it was a real shock for Annette's mother. This happened when the children were grown and her parents went to stay with a son and daughter in Little Falls until another house could be built.

When Annette was around one year old she nearly died from measles according to what her older brother George has told her. Her first childhood memory is of starting first grade when she was about 6 1/2 years old. There were two division in the first grade. At Christmas-time half of the class was promoted to second grade because they had the better grades. Annette was in this group. She also thought she was a naughty little brat in school from what she remembers. She chuckled recalling being rather mischievous in school talking to all her friends and sending lots of notes.

At five or six she remembered getting a straw doll buggy and china doll for Christmas from a neighbor man that favored her. At Christmas they always put the tree in the parlour (front room). Her dad and brothers sold Christmas trees every year to earn extra money. Annette would get pennies from them to buy Christmas gifts for the family. Warm clothing was the usual gift for Christmas. Christmas foods included a sweet soup called saggo (a spice) and contained prunes and raisins. It was comparable to tapioca. There was also lots of home baked breads and sugar cookies.

The Christmas program from Sunday School was always fun. The children would all perform and then Santa Claus would come with bags of candy and nuts for everyone.

Speaking of famous people, Annette remembers playing with Charles Lindberg when she was six or seven. He was in Russel Bednar's class (Annette's husband-to-be).

When Annette was 13 or 14 the Peterson family moved northwest of Little Falls and Annette had to change schools. At 14 she had typhoid fever and missed a lot of school. She missed all the tests so had to maintain a C average to stay in high school. At 14 or 15 her parents took her to the state fair for the first time. That was a memorable experience.

Growing up her parents would take Otto, Mildred and Annette for picnics. The other children were older and away or doing other things. Annette has pleasant memories of her older brother George. He was a very patient babysitter and was Annette graduated from high school he bought her sailor graduation outfit. He was in the navy at that time.

One awful experience Annette will never forget was the time she forgot her lines in a Shakespeare play her class was performing for the other schoolchildren. She was 16 and very nervous. When she couldn't remember her lines all the children started laughing. Finally, the English teacher grabbed her off stage and Annette just bawled. "Well, that teacher should have been there helping us with lines!" remarked Annette. Annette said she never was any good at public speaking. She was alwasy scared to death. In groups she's much more comfortable socially and it's much more enjoyable.

Annette grew up never getting to ride a bus. She grew up in Little Falls in town about a mile form the school. She remembers doing lots of walking. During her free times at home she'd have friends over, go to picnics in the neighborhood, go swimming in the bank edge of the Mississippi River and sledding on the hill by the river in the winter. That was really a thrill. Annette and her sister, Mildred, would also go to the dance hall but weren't allowed to date. there were always boys available to dance with like the neighborhood boys they grew up with.

After high school Annette went for one year of training to become a teacher and get her certificate. She didn't really want to teach but would have preferred becoming something like a bookkeeper. From 18 to 26 she taught at various schools. She earned $65-90 per month. Plus, most places charged $25-30 per month for food and board with $5 extra for each weekend stay. Annette often would buy food and clothing for her mother. Wages didn't go very far back then.

Annette taught her first year of school right near Little Falls. It was a rural school that combined all the grades. Every Friday after school she'd walk home five or six miles with another teacher friend, Hazel, to their parents' homes. On Sunday Annette would get a ride back. One less walk!

Her second and third year she taught in the Little Falls area. In the fourth year she taught in Stillwater. She recalls it being very difficult with the hassle of transportation. She only went home at Christmastime. Other weekends she'd go to the cities to visit girlfriends. Her greatest memory is walking and SNOW! She didn't care for either very much.

Year five she taught in Randall, Minnesota. There was one incident where she punished a girl who couldn't get her math and she had to miss recess. "It shook the girl up a bit," noted Annette. That spring the school board clerk checked with her to see if she'd come back for another year. However, the father of this particular girl had said he'd make life difficult for her if she returned the next year. Needless to say, Annette didn't return.

During her many years of teaching Annette had many incidents she recalls but wasn't certain of when the all occurred. The little that followed her around and worshipped her brought a smile to Annette's face as she reminisced. There was also plenty of tragedies. Annette remembered when one of her boys was home squirrel hunting and his folks were gone. His little brother ran in front of the gun and was killed. Annette didn't go to the funeral because she wasn't invited. In retrospect she wished that she had gone and yet she wasn't sure. It was very sad. Annette stated she was a young teacher and had a lot to learn.

After five years of teaching a teacher had to renew their certificate by either reading a book and writing a report or taking a college class during summer school. She stayed in Schumacher Hall at St. Cloud State College and all the teachers had a lot of fun together. She took one class when she was 23 and another when she was 25. After the first five year renewal teachers were required to renew their certificate every two years. The teachers would sometimes play tricks on each other. One time a floor tied all the quilts on Annette's floor together. To return the favor Annette's floor invited them up for a party the night before everyone was leaving. They greeted them with pails of water. The housemother was so upset. "She couldn't believe these nice girls would do something like that," chuckled Annette. Everyone had to grab towels and start mopping up the wooden floors and walls. It was a mess!

There were many married women that would come to renew their certificates in the summer. Annette was talking to her roommate, a married woman, one day and mentioned that she thought married women shouldn't teach. Later that day Annette returned to her room to find it covered with baby pictures!

Annette's last three years of teaching were in Little Falls. She had been dating Russel Bednar occasionally the first two years. She was hesitant to teach there the third year for fear of it looking like she was "running" after him. Also, she lived with the Winzenburg family while teaching the third year. That year Russel had gone out to North Dakota to work.

Annette can remember George, her older brother, teasing her about Russel when he brought her back from her parents home. She was also writing Clarence at the time. He eventually married Annette's sister, Mildred. Clarence would seal his letters with sealing wax. "Heavens, they were only friendly letters - nothing private or secret!" stated Annette. Annette's mother did not want to see her daughter, a Presbyterian, marry a Catholic.

Annette's last year was a big class of 37 pupils. She recalled a bright little boy who just couldn't learn to read. She thought it might be a vision problem and suggested his parents take him to a doctor to get it checked. It turned out he couldn't see in one eye. The family was very poor and were very thankful to Annette for her help.

That year the mother of five of her students died when her dress caught on fire from the gas lights along the steps to their basement. Annette went to the wake at the home and brought roses. Those were the only flowers there for the funeral. It was actually a family of ten children. "It was very sad... all those children and the poor father..." reflected Annette.

During this time Annette had told Clarence she was seriously dating Russel. In October of that school year they were engaged. Russel's family would tease Annette that Russel would always shave for supper when Annette was there.

That Christmas season was busy as usual preparing at school for the big Christmas program. On the Friday night before the program Annette started getting "sinking spells" which are like fainting but you remain conscious and everything turns black as Annette remembers. When this happened she called to Russel's mother who took her to the hospital. She had appendicitis and had surgery. Russel was gone working on the farm and when he returned he gave her an engagement ring in the hospital. Annette's mother had wanted her to come home for Christmas and Annette had wanted to stay at the Winzenburgs. Her mother was disappointed but wrote in a letter to her that the good Lord had worked it out. Annette was in the hospital during Christmas.

In March of that school year a farm in Geneva became available to rent for Russel and Annette. The people were involved in the Owatonna Baptist School down there and then moved to Little Falls. The man asked Russel if he would like to rent it. Russel moved down in March to take care of the farm.

On May 30th, 1927 Annette Peterson and Russel Bednar were wed in Belle Prarie, Minnesota which is a very tiny town just north of Little Falls. There were about 30 guests at the wedding. Russel's sister played the organ and the children sang. Annette's family able to make the wedding. There was no reception after the ceremony.

That day Annette went to Bill and Eulelia's (her brother and his wife) to dress for the wedding. She was wearing Eulelia's dress. After the wedding Annette changed there into her traveling suit. Russel and Annette stopped at the Burene Hotel in St. Cloud to eat. Annette remembers coming down some stairs and they were playing the wedding march. "Who knows how it happened!" she commented shaking her head in wonder. After lunch they traveled down to Minneapolis and stayed at the Curtis Motel. The next day they drove down to Owatonna and arrived at their farm in Geneva around 9 PM. The next day they went to Albert Lea to get furniture for the house. There were 120 acres to farm and lots of flowers around the house as she remembers. She didn't miss teaching at all! One night a group of people in Geneva came over to welcome the new couple by singing them songs called "chivaries". Russel then treated them all to ice cream sundaes in town.

The first party she remembers attending was put on by the neighborhood birthday club. The first party Annette gave was in honor of Russel's mother with all the neighbors invited. Annette also belonged to a study club affiliated with the state since she was a former teacher. They met every other Thursday and each took turns giving presentations. There were 16 ladies in the group. They studied the United States and its possessions and did nature studies. She enjoyed getting together with the neighbors. They also had social activities and invite their husbands to an activity once a year.

The Winzenburgs attended the church at Newry just east of Geneva. The priest had a bad temper so Russel didn't want children brought up with this. They changed Catholic churches.

In April of 1928 their first baby, Muriel Ann, was born dead. She was a hydrocephalus baby. Annette was told it was due to her appendicitis surgery when they also removed cysts from her ovary. Annette said it was a miracle that the poisonous fluid didn't pass into her system. Two days before the baby was born Annette knew something was wrong because she was having terrible headaches. During the pregnancy the doctor also knew something was wrong and didn't tell Annette. "That's just how doctors were back then. They didn't tell you anything," commented Annette. She was pretty upset that he didn't tell her something was wrong. It was a very difficult summer and Russel's mother came down to stay with them awhile. One year later they had a healthy baby girl, Elizabeth Ann. Annette remembered being "very worried" carrying her. After this baby she had a miscarriage when she was three months along.

Moving onto the farm was a new experience to Annette. She had the opportunity to raise one hundred chickens. They put them in a small shack in the spring when they didn't need heat. The got to the point where they'd jump on Annette's shoulder when she was feeding to them. She would sometimes feed them wild lettuce. They didn't lose any chickens from that first batch. When the chickens reached a year they were placed in the haymow to lay eggs. The leg horns (a type of chicken) would be very hard to catch and get into the trees. What a sight that must have been!

During 1930 a number of events occurred. Betty was one year old and had gotten a bad cold. They took her to the doctor and he told Annette to call him if they noticed any swelling on the back of her ear. The next day Annette saw swelling and Betty had to go to the hospital for mastoiditis. They performed surgery to remove the tumor. It was a dangerous surgery but Betty came out okay. Annette can remember crying with the woman patient in the other room. Betty had to relearn how to walk. Russel and Annette also had Russel's sister living with them that year during school. She attended the academy in Ellendale but didn't like the nuns and decided not to continue. That year Annette also had a baby boy, David Russel, in July but he died three months later. Hes heart valve never closed - a blue baby. Annette always felt like it might have been a good thing if this boy had lived. A boy between all the older girls might have been a good influence for them according to Annette.

That spring Annette was very nervous. She still took part in the study club but she couldn't eat because she was too nervous. Russel didn't know what to do seeing Annette going downhill. The doctor suggested he send her home to be with her parents for awhile. He went ahead and sent Annette and Betty to her parents in Little Falls. When she got there she found out she was pregnant again. She then went to stay with Bill and Eulelia. During this time "Eulelia wouldn't let me lift a finger and maybe I'd be able to save the baby if I could keep quiet. That's what the doctor said." This was in 1931 when she had her third miscarriage and was hospitalized up there for a couple days. After staying with Bill and Eulelia a little longer after the miscarriage Annette and Betty returned by train again. They were in Little Falls for about a month.

In 1932 Marilyn was born. Following this baby there were no more problems with her pregnancies. She went on to have six more children. They all had the same doctor, Dr. Ertel. He was a kind man and would scold the nurses if they scolded Annette. All of the children lived on the farm in Geneva. They rented it for 21 years.

The kids had all the normal childhood diseases. When the kids got the mumps Russel also got them. He was real sick and the older boys, Kenny (my dad) and Henry, were able to help out along with some hired men.

One summer the Winzenburg family all went to the fair in Albert Lea. While they were having a picnic lunch a woman passing by remarked, "Oh, that poor man!" Russel just laughed.

Another memory was when Betty was on the radio. Annette just got her dress sewn that day and the teacher took her to read her poem on the air. All of the family gathered around the radio to listen to her.

Annette remembers the schoolhouse burning down one year. One of the boys noticed smoke coming out of the register and told the teacher. The teacher had them all run to the house nearby. There was no chance to save the building.

Annette also clearly remembers the day Henry got hit by a car. He was eight years old. He was trapping with a neighbor boy and had to go back across the road to get his lunch pail. The neighbors took him to the doctor. He had a cracked collar bone and a bump on his head. He had to stay in bed for a week. Annette recalls going around the house crying when she was called about the accident. Her little son, Eddie, followed her around doing the same thing. Looking back, it was rather comical even though it was a very serious situation at the time.

Accidents in big families seem rather common. Annette also recalled when Alice was sledding and ran into a car. She bumped the hub of the wheel. They took her to the doctor to be checked and as a result of it all he found lice! Alice probably got it from the children of a new Mexican family in town. They got the remedy for it and also notified the school and parents.

"Kids were always getting lost" commented Annette. Once they thought Kenny was lost and that he had wondered off. After searching high and low they found him fast asleep on the couch in the house. Another time Betty got lost out in the cornfield. She heard mens' voices and followed that thinking it was her dad and the boys. She arrived to find it was was neighbors fixing their fence. She had wondered quite a ways from home.

When Annette was 42 she had pyorrhea and had to have all her teeth pulled and get dentures. While she was in bed recuperating the kids had to make the meals. She said it was pretty funny watching them try to put a meal together.

For celebrations homemade ice cream was THE food. They had it for everything. In fact, at a party for Marilyn she was so sick of that she threw her plate. The family wearied of this celebration food but now Annette would love to have a dish of it.

The family would also take trips to Little Falls to visit the grandparents and cousins. Russel and Annette's parents would also occasionally come down. Everyone would work hard together to get packed and ready to leave the farm for a few days. There was quite a scurry of activity then.

By this time now most of the family was grown and on their own. One night Russel and Annette drove into town to see a movie. On the way in Annette noticed a nice house on the hill. Russel suggested they check it out. Sure enough, it was up for sale. It belonged to the Pelinkas in Blooming Prairie and they were anxious to sell. They were renting it to the Garnesses. Russel was able to buy it with a down payment from some money left to him by his dad. He bought the home and 200 acres to farm.

Moving was awful according to Annette. The hired movers came early and they weren't ready. There was a wooden stove they had to move and it left soot all over. Someone went back to clean it all up but it wasn't Annette. The neighbors also helped them move. There was electricity at the new home. In the course of the day Annette knew she had to feed the movers so between herself and a neighbor lady they attempted to use the electric stove. They were both "scared to death to turn on the stove" but managed to put a cake together to bake. In spite of all their checking the cake turned out.

At the new farm there was a schoolhouse at the bottom of the hill. That freed Russel up from having to drive them everyday. Later on they took the bus to Ellendale. The Winzenburg family lived in this home for 16 years.

Much later in time Kenny was renting a farm and Russel was down bed with a bad back. Kenny came over one day and offerred to buy the farm from his dad by making a down payment and taking over the mortgage. This was music to Russel's ears!

In the meantime, Russel and Annette needed to find a place to live in town. They also wanted a ground floor home for possible future health concerns. They did a lot of looking but found very little in Blooming Prairie. One day Mr. Johnson, the man Kenny had rented from, asked Russel if he was looking for a place to live. He offered Russel his place for sale. They were considering buying a place from Mr. Betlach at the time. However, he changed his mind and backed out of the deal making it possible for Winzenburgs to buy Mr. Johnson's house in town. The house had been originally moved from nearby Austin. Annette never really cared for the kitchen and dining area but it had extra bedrooms that they needed for their kids. The kitchen had lots of cupboards. "You almost had to have a list to remember where you put things so you could find them again!" recalls Annette.

When Russel retired he took a part-time job at the local golf course doing grounds work. Annette had a very good friend, Mrs. Yentsch, who lived right next door. They spent a lot of time together. One day Russel came home feeling like he had the flu and went to bed for a week. He was 71 and didn't like going to the doctor. He finally did go after much prodding by Annette and his kids. He had a small heart attack. Shortly after this he died from a heart attack on the home farm where he would go to help out Kenny.

After Russel died Annette knew she had to move but didn't want to go into Blooming Prairie's nursing home. She wasn't that impressed with the set up. Annette had health problems and she knew she couldn't stay alone just as the doctor had said. She stayed with each of her children for awhile. Her daughter, Anita, put her name on a list of a Catholic nursing home in Austin. An opening came up at Sacred Heart Hospice shortly after and Annette has been in Austin since.

She fist moved into the wing for skilled care but after four months a single room opened on the less skilled wing. She has been there twelve years. She has developed many friendships and appreciates the opportunity to socialize. She takes part in a variety of the activities at the Hospice. She is very thankful to be at Sacred Hart.
